---
title: "The Discrete Fourier Transform"
layout: default
date: 2024-10-13 04:22:00 -0000
categories: posts
tags: ['dsp', 'maths']
---

# The Discrete Fourier Transform

Before diving into my next Juce project, I wanted to cover some of the mathematics. This post and the next (covering the Fast Fourier Transform) will be pretty math heavy, so prepare youselves for that!

## The Equation

The Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is a version of the Fourier Transform for discrete time steps or samples. The equation below is the core equation for this transform. 

$$X\left[n\right] = \sum_{k=0}^N x\left[k\right]e^{-j\frac{2\pi}{N}kn}$$

Where:
+ $`X\left[n\right]`$ is the amplitude of the frequency in bin $`n`$
+ $`x\left[k\right]`$ is the amplitude of the source signal at sample $`k`$
+ $`N`$ is the total number of samples taken for this calculation
+ $`j`$ is the imaginary number $`\sqrt{-1}`$
+ And $`e`$ is Euler's Number

That's it! Pretty simple, right? I should note that the frequency band for bin $`n`$ is dependent on the sample frequency, usually being some fraction of the sample rate.

## A Little Explanation

Okay, so we may need to understand things a bit further. First of all, what is the purpose of the Fourier Transform?

In 1822, French mathematician Joseph Fourier published his study *The Analytical Theory of Heat*. In this work, Fourier claimed that any signal in time could be represented by successive addition of sinusoids.

For example, by adding up sinusoids of different frequencies and amplitudes, you could get a resulting signal that resembled, say, a square wave.

Likewise, you can decompose a complicated signal into a set of sinusoids of different frequencies and amplitudes. This latter part is what the Fourier Transform accomplishes.

It's actually a very elegant way of doing things. The use Euler's Number in the equation is very ingenious. It's using Euler's Formula as a compact way of indicating a sum of sinusoids. 

Euler's Formula is as follows:

$$e^{jx} = \cos{x} + j\sin{x}$$

Because there is a $`-j`$ in the Fourier Transform, however, we end up with the following:

$$e^{-jx} = \cos{x} - j\sin{x}$$

Why the minus sign? As far as I understand it, it's mostly convention but there is a good argument for it ensuring cosine and sine functions with the same phase don't cancel each other out. A better explanation of that can be found at this [Stack Overflow post](https://dsp.stackexchange.com/a/19007).

The rest of the exponent defines how much each data point in the signal contributes to the given frequency bin.

The DFT puts the signal in terms of the frequency domain rather than the time domain. What this means is that our x-axis is in terms of frequency rather than time or samples. This makes it very easy to analyze what frequency components are present in a signal, and determine how to change those components. This can be used for things like filtering out higher frequencies from an audio signal. 

Overall, the Discrete Fourier Transform is a very elegant equation, and is one of the most foundational equations in signal processing.

However, the summation in the transform needs to be repeated for each frequency bin, resulting in pretty heavy computation times when implemented in code. This is where the Fast Fourier Transform comes in, which we'll be exploring in the next post. See you then!
